---
title: 'CHOLAR: Characterization of LncRNA from raw reads'
tags:
  - RNA-seq
  - automated
  - pipeline
  - graphical user interface
  - lncRNA

authors:
  - name: Haneesh Jindal 
    orcid: 0000-0003-0632-7330
    affiliation: 1 
  - name: Anubha Dey
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Manjari Kiran
    orcid: 0000-0003-0153-7072
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
    
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Systems and Computational Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, India
   index: 1
   
date: 13 June 2022
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

RNA-sequencing has found numerous implementations in research, from distinguishing immune cell subtypes 
to differential gene expression between cancer versus normal tissue types [@Villani2017][@Bao2021].
Another application of RNA-seq is to identify novel transcripts involved in various biological processes
(Gupta, Kleinjans and Caiment 2021). The most relevant is context and cell-type-specific non-coding RNAs,
such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which have become a case-point for most transcriptomic studies proving
their role in regulating gene expression, post-transcriptional regulation, and epigenetic regulation
(Engreitz et al. 2016, Zhu et al. 2019).
It is becoming crucial to check the relative expression of lncRNAs in transcriptome-wide studies. Our group
has developed an automated lncRNA expression pipeline. The only requirement from the user-side is raw data in
FASTQ format ( Paired-end or Single-end). The user will get a list of known and novel lncRNAs, and differential
gene expression between condition(s). The pipelines come with a user-friendly GUI, thereby eliminating the need
for the user to be versed in complex transcriptome analysis and UNIX environment.  The source code is available
under an open-source licence at https://github.com/schosio/CHOLAR.

# Statement of need

The number of inferences generated from RNA-seq datasets is countless. The software used in the RNA-seq analysis
pipeline requires a UNIX-based command-line interactive (CLI) environment, with each software executed in succession.
Installing multiple CLI tools, handling various file formats, and plotting graphs require understanding of Linux and
R programming language. Moreover, no tool identifies novel lncRNAs from raw transcriptomic data to the best of our
knowledge. LncRNA identification tools such as `CPAT` (Wang et al. 2013) (and other tools) take either transcript
sequence (FASTA) or transcript coordinate (BED, GTF) as input and provide a list of predicted lncRNAs.
To address these issues, we developed CHOLAR which is a tool for characterization of LncRNA from raw reads .
`CHOLAR` i) identifies novel lncRNAs from raw reads ii) provides a user-friendly GUI interface to make changes
at every step iii) allows to identify differentially expressed genes and lists known and novel lncRNAs iv) generates
publication-quality plots such as MA plot, Volcano plot and heatmap.

# Implementation

The `CHOLAR` pipeline is implemented in bash and R, where it first reads the input FASTQ files(s) to check the
quality of reads using `FastQC` (Fiancette et al. 2021). Bad quality ( < 28 ) reads and adaptors are removed using
`Trimmomatic` (Bolger, Lohse and Usadel 2014). `HISAT2` performs the mapping of reads on the human reference genome
(hg38) (Zhang et al. 2021). The SAM files generated from `HISAT2` are converted to BAM, and PCR duplicates are removed
utilising the `samtools` toolkit (Danecek et al. 2021). 
The transcript assembly is done using Stringtie, and the resulting GTF files are merged using the merge utility of
`Stringtie` (Pertea et al. 2015). The merged GTF file is compared against the reference annotation file from GENCODE
(Frankish et al. 2021) to filter novel transcripts using `GFFCOMPARE`. The coding potential of novel transcripts is
predicted using CPAT (Wang et al. 2013). The gene counts are calculated using `HTSeq` (Putri et al. 2022), and subsequent
differential gene expression analysis (DGEA) is done using packages from R statistical language. 
The `DESeq2` package is used for performing DGEA (Love, Huber and Anders 2014), and `ggplot` and `dplyr` libraries for
plotting graphs. The Graphical user interface is built using zenity in bash. The schematic of the tool is given in figure 1.

# Example

We chose the GSE147761 dataset from the GEO database (NCBI) to showcase the CHOLAR tool. A sample of results and plots 
generated by the tool are given in figure 2. The GUI of the tool is shown in figure 3.

# Citations

# Figures

![Fig1: Fig1: Schematic of the tool CHOLAR. It starts from input files, performs alignment; assembly; LncRNA identification; differential expression analysis and provides output files and plots.] (fig1.png) { width=50% }


# Acknowledgements

# References
